**What do we learn from our harvest surveys?**

The diary surveys tell us how many people hunted ducks (or geese, or doves, or woodcock, etc.) in each state, how many days they hunted, when and where they hunted, and how many birds they harvested each year. We have conducted these surveys for many years, including years with short hunting seasons, long seasons, various daily bag limits, and a range of season dates. Based on harvest survey results from previous years, we can predict quite accurately what the harvest will be for a specific season length and daily bag limit. So, the information that hunters provide when they participate in our harvest surveys helps us set annual hunting regulations that minimize the risk of over-harvesting these birds, but it also helps the USFWS and state wildlife agencies provide the most, and hopefully the best, hunting opportunity possible each year.

`GRAPHIC: Map of US, click on state shows statistics.
Color code state with highest birds/hunter, state with most days afield?`

>*How do we know the total number of waterfowl (or dove, or woodcock) hunters in a state?* [Click to bring up box with short explanation of HIP] Hunters are required to register for the Harvest Information Program (HIP) in each state they hunt migratory game birds. Methods of HIP registration vary from state to state - some states require a separate permit, others offer free HIP registration over the internet, etc. - so before you hunt migratory birds, be sure you know what the state requires, especially if you're a nonresident. When you register for HIP you're asked about how many of certain kinds of birds you harvested the previous year - this helps us make sure we send most of our dove surveys, for example, to people who usually hunt doves, rather than to waterfowl hunters. The states send their HIP registration information to the USFWS as they collect it before and during the hunting season, and the USFWS selects a sample of those hunters and sends them diary surveys. The estimates of total hunters are based on a combination of the total number of HIP registrations in a state and responses to the diary survey from a fairly small sample of total HIP registrants. For example, if a state has 100,000 HIP registrants and 50% of the hunters who respond to the diary survey for dove hunting in that state report that they hunted doves, the estimate of dove hunters for the state is 50% of total HIP registrants, or 50,000 hunters. The actual calculations are more complicated, but that's the gist of it.

Once we know how many hunters there are in each state, we rely on what people tell us in the diary surveys to estimate hunting effort and total harvest. Using ducks as an example, we multiply the average number of days people reported hunting ducks on their waterfowl hunting diaries and multiply that average by the number of duck hunters, and that gives us estimates of the total number of days people hunted ducks. Same thing for harvest - average number of ducks shot, as reported on the diary surveys, times number of duck hunters gives us estimates of the number of ducks shot in each state.

The diary surveys provide two other important pieces of information - when and where birds are harvested throughout the hunting season. Although the USFWS decides the season length every year, each of the state wildlife agencies choose the hunting season dates in their state. They try to select the dates that will be most likely to provide the best hunting. Diary survey participants tell us the exact dates they hunted and how many birds they harvested on each of those dates. So, a state agency can look at the total number of birds shot on each date for the past, say, 10 years, to figure out when the most birds are usually harvested in their state, and set their season to cover those dates.
(Bar chart showing harvest by date/week here - maybe contrast dove harvest, almost all of which occurs in the first couple of week, with ducks or geese)

Information about where the most birds are harvested is also important. Duck harvest is only high in areas where there are lots of ducks, and that's because those areas have good duck habitat. So, the harvest survey can help the USFWS, state wildlife agencies, and other partners decide where they should use their resources to protect, maintain, and/or improve critical wetland habitats for waterfowl.

`GRAPHIC: [Select species] Map of US, click on state to see counties.
Color code state with highest harvest (5% red), 2nd highest harvest (10% orange), and 3rd highest harvest (15% lighter orange), top 50% (shaded).
Click on state shows same map and color code by county`

>*The waterfowl diary survey only specifies ducks, geese, sea ducks, and brant. 
How do you know the harvest for individual species?* Many novice hunters can't identify the species of all the ducks they shoot, especially early in the season before some of the birds have "colored up" into their distinctive breeding plumage. Even experienced hunters can have a tough time identifying some of those birds. That's why we don't ask for species information in the waterfowl diary survey. But ducks can be identified to species just from their wing plumage, and geese from their tail feathers. [maybe a short species ID video clip here?] So, we conduct another survey every year called the Waterfowl Parts Collection Survey. The 5,000 to 6,000 randomly selected waterfowl hunters who participate in that survey send us a wing from every duck they shoot and the tail feathers of every goose they shoot throughout the hunting season. This survey tells us the species composition of each state's duck and goose harvests. [maybe some kind of species composition graphic(s) here?] We combine that information with the estimates of total harvest from the diary survey to get estimates of how many birds of each species were harvested. For example, say the estimated duck harvest (from the diary survey) in state X was 200,000 birds, and 35% of the wings we got from that state in the Parts Survey were from mallards. Then the estimated mallard harvest in state X is 70,000 birds (35% of 200,000).

We can also identify the sex of a duck from its wing plumage, and whether it was a young-of-the-year bird or an adult. The ratio of young-of-the-year birds to adults gives a good measure of the productivity of each species compared to previous years. [maybe a time series graph of age ratios for a species here?] That, in turn, helps biologists assess their population status ("population status" is jargon, need a better way to say this). The USFWS also conducts dove, woodcock, and band-tailed pigeon wing surveys to measure the annual productivity of those species.

Duck wing identification can be a handy skill when you're having a good day in the duck blind, too, especially since you're only allowed to shoot one or two of some species. Male ducks are usually (but not always) easy enough to identify, but young-of-the-year females of several species are pretty drab "brown ducks" that aren't very distinctive, and some of them look similar. For example, what is this duck? [photo of immature female redhead] What about this one? [photo of female gadwall] Do you have to worry about the next bird you shoot if you have already bagged one of these? Here's a short video that shows you how to tell a female mallard from a drake mallard that isn't colored up yet, just by looking at their wings. And here's a longer one that shows you what wing characteristics to look for to identify even the most nondescript ducks to species.   

We mentioned earlier that the date information hunters give us on the diary surveys can be useful for setting hunting season dates. The Waterfowl Parts Survey also asks hunters for date information, so results of that survey give states the option of further refining their season date selection process. For example, if most hunters in a state prefer to shoot mallards, the survey results can be used to show when the most mallards are shot in that state.

The "when and where" information from the Waterfowl Parts Survey could also be useful to some hunters. Let's say you just moved to a new state and you don't know anyone there - where should you look for a place to hunt mallards (or pintails, etc.)? The survey information might be a good place to start. Or, let's say you want to take a trip to the East and shoot a black duck and a common eider, hopefully during the same hunt or at least in the same place. Whether you want to hire a guide or go on a do-it-yourself hunt, the "when and where" harvest information for those species would help you figure out what areas and dates to consider for your trip. What about if you want to try for an Atlantic brant while you're at it? You could use the species harvest by date and county to see if that's a possibility. We're working on making that kind of information more readily available to hunters. 

(graphic here showing overlap of best black duck, common eider, and Atlantic brant counties?)
